📝 Getting Started With MLIR (#1555)
munich-quantum-toolkit/core: docs/mlir/GettingStarted.md

Reviewer: Not super important, but it's generally a good idea to only have one sentence per line. This should make future diffs easier to read.

# Getting Started

> The MQT Compiler Collection establishes a "classical-first" approach to quantum compilation.

Reviewer: In [arxiv:2604.08674](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08674), we are saying that we adopt a quantum-classical approach. 🤔

Author: Then we should probably keep consistent 👍🏻

Following an open-source philosophy, the project welcomes external contributions.
However, because quantum compilers are complex programs by nature, it can sometimes be difficult to know where and how to start.

This page guides you through the key concepts and provides a solid understanding of the project's quantum-compilation infrastructure and underlying design decisions.

## Setup

Before you start, visit the [installation](../installation.md) page.
There you will find detailed instructions on how to download the project and install and set up the MLIR framework correctly.
Once this is done, you can compile the project as follows:

Run the following commands from the repository root.

```console
$ cmake -B build \
    -DMLIR_DIR=<path to MLIR> \
    -DLLVM_DIR=<path to LLVM> \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE:STRING=Release \
    -DBUILD_MQT_CORE_MLIR=ON

> $ cd build && cmake --build . --target mqt-cc

Reviewer: Now that we have our beautiful presets, this can be simplified a bit.

```suggestion
$ cmake --preset release
$ cmake --build --preset release --target mqt-cc
```

Author: Uhh 👀 I very much like that.

```

If everything worked correctly, the following command should print a usage message.

```console

> $ ./mlir/tools/mqt-cc/mqt-cc --help

Reviewer: This has to be adapted if you like the suggestion above.

```suggestion
$ ./build/release/mlir/tools/mqt-cc/mqt-cc --help
```

```

## Fundamentals

To keep this guide self-contained, this section reviews the fundamentals of quantum computing and the key concepts of MLIR.
If you are familiar with both quantum computing and MLIR, you may skip this section.

### Quantum Computing

_Qubits_ are the fundamental unit of quantum computing.
Whereas a classical bit is either in the state $0$ or $1$, a qubit can exist in a superposition of both states.
Mathematically, we denote a qubit as follows.

```{math}
:label: qubit_equation

> |\psi\rangle = \alpha|0\rangle + \beta|1\rangle

Reviewer: To connect with the part of the sentence below.

```suggestion
:label: qubit_equation
|\psi\rangle = \alpha|0\rangle + \beta|1\rangle,
```

Quantum _gates_ --- mathematically described by unitary matrices --- modify a qubit's state.
For instance, the Hadamard gate H creates an equal superposition state.
Measuring that state yields $|0\rangle$ or $|1\rangle$ with probability $0.5$ each.

```{math}
:label: hadamard_gate_ket0
\begin{aligned}
H|0\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle + \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle\\
H|1\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle - \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

Another example of a one-qubit gate is the X gate, which simply flips the qubit's state.

```{math}
:label: x_gate
\begin{aligned}
X|0\rangle &= |1\rangle\\
X|1\rangle &= |0\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

A quantum gate may target multiple qubits. The controlled-X gate acts on two qubits and applies an X gate to the target qubit when the control qubit is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

```{math}
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle

> \end{aligned}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle
\end{aligned},
```

```{code-block} mlir
func.func @select(%a: i32, %b: i32, %cond: i1) -> i32 {
    cf.cond_br %cond, ^exit(%a: i32), ^exit(%b: i32)
^exit(%v : i32):
    return %v : i32
}
```

The `^exit` label defines a _block_ that takes a 32-bit integer as an argument and contains the `return` operation.
There is another implicit block hidden in the snippet above.
Internally, the `@select` function is represented as follows.

```{code-block} mlir
func.func @select(i32, i32, i1) -> i32 {
^entry(%a: i32, %b: i32, %cond: i1):
    cf.cond_br %cond, ^exit(%a: i32), ^exit(%b: i32)
^exit(%v : i32):
    return %v : i32
}
```

The _terminator_ --- the last operation inside a block --- determines the control flow.
For instance, the `cf.cond_br` terminator jumps to the exit block with `%v = %a` if `%cond` is true.
Otherwise, it uses `%v = %b`.
The `return` operation is another example of a terminator that returns control to the caller of the function.
Generally, a block consists of multiple operations, with the final one being the terminator.

Note that the `@select` function body consists of two blocks.
The respective enveloping structure in MLIR is a _region_.

> A region is always attached to an operation (its parent), encompasses multiple blocks, and is usually indicated by curly braces.

Reviewer: Maybe a bit of a nitpick.

```suggestion
A region is always attached to an operation (its parent), encompasses one or more blocks, and is usually indicated by curly braces.
```

    cf.cond_br %cond, ^bb2, ^bb3
  ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb1
    %1 = arith.index_cast %iv : index to i32
    %sum_next = arith.addi %sum_iter, %1 : i32
    %iv_next = arith.addi %iv, %step : index
    cf.br ^bb1(%iv_next, %sum_next : index, i32)
  ^bb3:  // pred: ^bb1
    return
  }
```

While higher-level abstractions are extremely useful for optimizations, it is much easier to generate actual machine instructions from lower-level dialects.

Luckily, we don't have to perform this _conversion_ --- the transformation from one dialect to another --- by hand.
The MLIR framework already implements this and many other conversions between the built-in dialects.
Furthermore, we can develop additional custom conversions using the conversion framework, which defines exactly how a transformation must look and under what circumstances the resulting IR is considered valid.

A conversion is a specific class of transformation within the _pass infrastructure_.
Simply put, a pass traverses the nested substructures of a program and optionally rewrites some parts of it.
Moreover, multiple passes can be orchestrated into a _pass pipeline_, which executes a series of configurable passes sequentially.

> That's it! Now that we've covered the fundamentals, we can move on and explore how the MQT Compiler Collection utilizes MLIR to build a compiler for quantum computing.

Reviewer: A note on the framing: In [arxiv:2604.08674](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.08674), we usually call `mqt-cc` a "blueprint for a future-proof quantum-classical compilation framework." I don't think we should always use the full honorific, but something like this could make sense:

```suggestion
That's it! Now that we've covered the fundamentals, we can move on and explore how the MQT Compiler Collection utilizes MLIR to build a quantum-classical compilation framework.
```

## The MQT Compiler Collection

The MQT Compiler Collection provides tools to optimize and transpile quantum programs.
This section outlines how we use the MLIR framework and its compilation infrastructure to implement these tasks.

### Quantum Dialects

The MQT Compiler Collection defines two dialects in MLIR, each with a distinct purpose.
While the Quantum Circuit (QC) dialect is tailored to exchanging with other formats (such as OpenQASM), the Quantum Circuit Optimization (QCO) dialect is --- as the name suggests --- specifically designed for optimizations.
Let's explore their differences.

> The following snippet allocates and subsequently deallocates a dynamic qubit using the `alloc` operation of each dialect.

Reviewer: Maybe a bit better.

```suggestion
The following snippets allocate and subsequently deallocate a dynamic qubit using the `alloc` operation of each dialect.
```

If there were no `sink` operation for static qubits in the QCO dialect, this property would be violated.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.static 1 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.static 1 : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_0 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

Let's apply a Hadamard gate to a qubit next:

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_1 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

Notice how the Hadamard operation in the QCO dialect consumes and produces SSA values, while the operation in the QC dialect operates on a qubit in place.
We say that the QC dialect uses "reference semantics" whereas the QCO dialect uses "value semantics".
Semantically, the operations in the QCO dialect return the new state of a qubit after modifying it.

> Instead of the Hadamard, we can also achieve the same transformation with X and Y rotations using parameterized gates as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of a Hadamard gate, we can also achieve the same transformation with X and Y rotations using parameterized gates as follows:
```

```

:::
::::

Moving on from one-qubit gates, let us apply a controlled-X operation.
To that end, we allocate a second qubit and use the `ctrl` modifier operation of the respective dialect to implement the controlled-X.
By using modifiers, arbitrary (multi-)controlled gates can be represented without having to explicitly define them.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
%q1 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit

qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.ctrl(%q0) {
    qc.x %q1 : !qc.qubit

} : !qc.qubit

%c0 = qc.measure %q0 : !qc.qubit -> i1
%c1 = qc.measure %q1 : !qc.qubit -> i1

qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q1 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q1_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit

%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q0_2, %q1_1 = qco.ctrl(%q0_1) targets (%arg0 = %q1_0) {
    %q0_2 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
    qco.yield %q0_2
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%q0_3, %c0 = qco.measure %q0_2 : !qco.qubit
%q1_2, %c1 = qco.measure %q1_1 : !qco.qubit

qco.sink %q0_3 : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q1_2 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

> The figure below illustrates the data-flow graph of the textual intermediate representation above.

Reviewer: This should maybe mention that the figure represents the QCO IR.

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/data-flow.svg
:align: center
:width: 75%
:figclass: only-light

> The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data-flow graph of the QCO IR shown above.
```

```

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/data-flow-dark.svg
:align: center
:width: 75%
:figclass: only-dark

> The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data-flow graph of the QCO IR shown above.
```

```

The dependencies between operations are naturally expressed because the QCO dialect models quantum computations as directed acyclic "data-flow" graphs (DAGs).
For instance, the controlled-X operation depends on the application of the Hadamard operation.
This is especially useful for gate cancellation: if one gate is the inverse of another, cancel both.

> Consequently, the expressive data-flow representation is what makes the QCO dialect so powerful for optimization and algorithms more generally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, the expressive data-flow representation is what makes the QCO dialect so powerful for optimization and, more generally, algorithms.
```

However, that expressiveness also increases syntax complexity. This is best seen in the `qco.ctrl` operation:

> - The input target qubit must be explicitly specified and is aliased to the block argument `%arg0`.

Reviewer: Just a note: Depending on how #1727 goes, QC might also get block arguments.

Reviewer: QC also has block arguments now.

%N = arith.constant 3 : index

%r0_0 = qtensor.alloc(%N) : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

%r0_1, %q0_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_0[%i0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_2, %q1_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_1[%i1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_3, %q2_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_2[%i2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit

%q0_2, %q1_1 = qco.ctrl(%q0_1) targets (%arg0 = %q1_0) {
  %q1_1 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
  qco.yield %q1_1
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%q0_3, %q2_1 = qco.ctrl(%q0_2) targets (%arg0 = %q2_0) {
  %q2_1 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
  qco.yield %q2_1
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%r0_4 = qtensor.insert %q0_3 into %r0_3[%i0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_5 = qtensor.insert %q1_1 into %r0_4[%i1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_6 = qtensor.insert %q2_1 into %r0_5[%i2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

qtensor.dealloc %r0_6 : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
```

:::
::::

Similarly to the earlier argument, the QCO dialect requires `insert` operations for qubit SSA values to satisfy linear typing.
Moreover, the QCO dialect also enforces this property for registers (`%r0_1`, `%r0_2`, etc.).

> Consequently, in the QCO dialect the SSA value of a register represents its state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, in the QCO dialect, the SSA value of a register represents its state.
```

      scf.yield %ri_2, %ctrl_1 : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>, !qco.qubit
    }

    %r0_4 = qtensor.insert %q0_2 into %r0_3[%i0] : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

    qtensor.dealloc %r0_4 : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

    return
  }
```

:::
::::

Maybe you have already noticed that the dialects in the MQT Compiler Collection can represent quantum computations far beyond simple quantum circuits.
Ultimately, our goal is to define dialects expressive enough to represent a broad range of hybrid quantum-classical computations.

### Building Programs Programmatically

Sometimes it can be useful to create an in-memory representation of a quantum program.
For instance, a unit test might want to build a quantum program, perform some actions, and then verify that the resulting quantum program matches the expected outcome.

To create quantum programs, the MQT Compiler Collection provides the `QCProgramBuilder` and `QCOProgramBuilder` classes, respectively.
The following code snippets illustrate their usage.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} cpp
qc::QCProgramBuilder builder(/*MLIRContext*/ &ctx);
builder.initialize();

const auto q0 = builder.allocQubit();

> const auto q1 = builder.allocQubit();

Reviewer: Given that `allocQubit()` returns a `Value`, `const` is superfluous. 

```suggestion
auto q0 = builder.allocQubit();
auto q1 = builder.allocQubit();
```

builder.h(q0);
builder.ctrl(q0, [&] { builder.x(q1); });

builder.barrier({q0, q1});

const auto c0 = builder.measure(q0);

> const auto c1 = builder.measure(q1);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
auto c0 = builder.measure(q0);
auto c1 = builder.measure(q1);
```

builder.dealloc(q0);
builder.dealloc(q1);

auto program = builder.finalize();
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} cpp
qco::QCOProgramBuilder builder(&ctx);
builder.initialize();

Value q0 = builder.allocQubit();

> Value q1 = builder.allocQubit();

Reviewer: Not super necessary, but more consistent with the QC example.

```suggestion
auto q0 = builder.allocQubit();
auto q1 = builder.allocQubit();
```

q0 = builder.h(q0);
const auto [ctrlsOut, targOut] = builder.ctrl(q0, q1,
  [&](ValueRange targets) -> SmallVector<Value> {
   return {builder.x(targets[0])};
});
q0 = ctrlsOut[0];
q1 = targOut[0];

> const auto barrierOut = builder.barrier({q0, q1});

Reviewer: ```suggestion
auto barrierOut = builder.barrier({q0, q1});
```

q0 = barrierOut[0];
q1 = barrierOut[1];

Value c0;
Value c1;
std::tie(q0, c0) = builder.measure(q0);
std::tie(q1, c1) = builder.measure(q1);

builder.sink(q0);
builder.sink(q1);

auto program = builder.finalize();
```

:::
::::

### Compilation Flow

The goal of any compiler is to take a (quantum) program and transform it into a more efficient, executable one.
The MQT Compiler Collection achieves this using the following compilation pipeline:

> - First, a program in a front-end quantum language (e.g. OpenQASM) is translated to the QC dialect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- First, a program in a front-end quantum language (e.g., OpenQASM) is translated to the QC dialect.
```

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/compiler-collection-pipeline.svg
:align: center
:width: 70%
:figclass: only-light

The compilation pipeline of the MQT Compiler Collection.
```

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/compiler-collection-pipeline-dark.svg
:align: center
:width: 70%
:figclass: only-dark

The compilation pipeline of the MQT Compiler Collection.
```

This has an important consequence:
Theoretically, any front-end quantum language (today's and tomorrow's!) that translates its abstract syntax tree to the QC dialect can leverage all passes developed and maintained within the MQT Compiler Collection.
This approach has been a success story in the classical compiler world, where, instead of relying on proprietary compilation stacks, programming languages such as C++, Rust, and Go use LLVM as an optimization driver.
The MQT Compiler Collection attempts to establish this design philosophy in the quantum world.

## Writing Your First Optimization Pass

Optimizations are a core part of the MQT Compiler Collection, as they are for any compiler.
In this section, you will implement a simple optimization pass and see how it fits into the MQT Compiler Collection workflow.

> ### Directory Layout

Reviewer: This section could benefit from an introductory sentence above and an outroductory (apparently not a real word) sentence toward the end. 🤔

| `Conversion/` | Defines conversions from or to other MLIR dialects.                          |
| `Dialect/`    | Defines (among others) the QC and QCO dialects. Contains the TableGen files. |
| `Support/`    | Defines utilities.                                                           |

Each dialect follows a consistent structure:

| Directory     | Description                                             |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Builder/`    | Defines the program builder.                            |
| `IR/`         | Defines the dialect, operations, and types in TableGen. |
| `Transforms/` | Defines transformations on the dialect.                 |
| `Utils/`      | Defines utilities.                                      |

**`mlir/lib/`**

The accompanying `.cpp` files for the headers. It follows the same folder structure as the include directory.

**`mlir/tools/`**

This folder contains the entry-point function for the `mqt-cc` executable.

**`mlir/unittests/`**

This folder contains unit-tests for the MQT Compiler Collection.

### Consecutive Hadamard Cancellation Pass

> Because the Hadamard is a Hermitian matrix, two consecutive Hadamards cancel each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the Hadamard gate corresponds to a Hermitian matrix, two consecutive Hadamards cancel each other.
```

```{math}
:label: hh=i
HH^{\dagger} = HH = I
```

We can use this equality to simplify a given quantum program.
Towards that end, we want to implement an optimization pass within the MQT Compiler Collection.
By doing so, everyone using the MQT Compiler Collection as a backend benefits from the work we put into the optimization pass.

> First, we need to define the pass in the QCO's TableGen file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we need to define the pass in one of QCO's TableGen files.
```

```{code-block} cpp

> // file: mlir/include/mlir/Dialect/QCO/IR/QCOOps.td

Reviewer: Is there a reason for not defining this in `.../QCO/Transforms/Passed.td`? 🤔

Author: This is definitely a mistake.

Particularly, we add a class `CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern` which inherits from `OpRewritePattern<HOp>`, where the template variable `HOp` specifies that the pattern should match Hadamard operations.
The overridden `matchAndRewrite` method is called for each matched Hadamard operation.

```cpp
// file: mlir/lib/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Optimizations/CancelConsecutiveHadamards.cpp

#include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/IR/QCOOps.h" // Newly added.

struct CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern final : OpRewritePattern<HOp> {

  explicit CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern(MLIRContext* context)
      : OpRewritePattern(context) {}

  LogicalResult matchAndRewrite(HOp op,
                                PatternRewriter& rewriter) const override {

    // Check if the successor is also a Hadamard operation.
    auto nextOp = dyn_cast<HOp>(*op.getOutputQubit(0).user_begin());
    if (!nextOp) {
      return failure();
    }

    // Replace the output of 'nextOp' with the input of 'op', essentially
    // unlinking both operations.
    //
    //           ┌───┐    ┌───┐
    // ───%in───▶│ H |───▶│ H |───%out───▶  =>  ───%out = %in───▶
    //           └───┘    └───┘
    //

>     rewriter.replaceAllUsesWith(
>       /*from= */nextOp.getOutputQubit(0),
>       /*to= */op.getInputQubit(0));

Reviewer: I don't know if this is more instructive (even though it might be less efficient). 🤔 

```suggestion
    rewriter.replaceOp(op, op.getInputQubit(0));
    rewriter.replaceOp(nextOp, nextOp.getInputQubit(0));
```

Author: I don't know which one is more pedantic. I will let @DRovara be the judge.

Reviewer 2: > I don't know if this is more instructive (even though it might be less efficient). 🤔

I'm not entirely convinced if this is more instructive. The reader basically has to understand what it means to replace an operation with its input - which is basically a short-hand way of saying we replace its output with  its input and then delete it.

I feel like the original format makes this a bit clearer (although I'm afraid it will never be entirely obvious to a reader without background knowledge)

Reviewer: Fair points! 

I actually ran into a problem with the current implementation in #1751. I'll come back here once I know more.

Reviewer: I'm already back! The implementation should reflect whatever we decide on in https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/pull/1762.

Reviewer: Just to summarize, the implementation should read like so:

```c++
rewriter.replaceAllUsesWith(
  /*from= */nextOp.getOutputQubit(0),
  /*to= */op.getInputQubit(0));
rewriter.eraseOp(nextOp);
rewriter.eraseOp(op);
```

Author: Done ☑️

  }
};
```

Finally, we implement the `runOnOperation` method by initializing a pattern set with `CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern` and calling `applyPatternsGreedily`, which repeatedly applies the pattern until no matches remain.

```{code-block} cpp
// file: mlir/lib/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Optimizations/CancelConsecutiveHadamards.cpp

void runOnOperation() override {
  ModuleOp entryPoint = getOperation();

  // Create the pattern set.
  RewritePatternSet patterns(&getContext());
  patterns.add<CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern>();

  // Apply patterns in an iterative and greedy manner.
  if (failed(applyPatternsGreedily(entryPoint, std::move(patterns)))) {
    signalPassFailure();
  }
}
```

> Congratulations, you have written your first optimization pass in MLIR 🎉

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations, you have written your first optimization pass in MLIR! 🎉
```

$|\alpha|^2$ and to $|1\rangle$ with probability $|\beta|^2$, and returns the
respective classical outcome ($0$ or $1$).

Quantum _gates_ --- mathematically described by unitary matrices --- modify a
qubit's state.
For instance, the Hadamard gate H creates an equal superposition state.
Measuring that state yields $|0\rangle$
or $|1\rangle$ with probability $0.5$ each.

```{math}
:label: hadamard_gate_ket0
\begin{aligned}
H|0\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle + \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle\\
H|1\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle - \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

Another example of a one-qubit gate is the X gate,
which simply flips the qubit's state.

```{math}
:label: x_gate
\begin{aligned}
X|0\rangle &= |1\rangle\\
X|1\rangle &= |0\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

A quantum gate may target multiple qubits.
The controlled-X gate acts on two qubits
and applies an X gate to the target qubit
when the control qubit is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

```{math}
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle
\end{aligned},
```

> where the first qubit is the control qubit.

Reviewer 3: Very minor, but technically a broken sentence. What about the following?

```suggestion
when the control qubit (first) is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

```{math}
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle
\end{aligned},
```

```

> where the first qubit is the control qubit.

Reviewer 3: Very minor, but technically a broken sentence. What about the following?

```suggestion
when the control qubit (first) is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

```{math}
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle
\end{aligned},
```

```

      %ri_1, %qi_0 = qtensor.extract %ri_0[%iv] : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

      %ctrl_1, %qi_1 = qco.ctrl(%ctrl_0) targets (%arg3 = %qi_0) {
        %6 = qco.x %arg3 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
        qco.yield %6 : !qco.qubit
      } : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

      %ri_2 = qtensor.insert %qi_1 into %ri_1[%iv] : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

      scf.yield %ri_2, %ctrl_1 : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>, !qco.qubit
    }

    %r0_4 = qtensor.insert %q0_2 into %r0_3[%i0] : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

    qtensor.dealloc %r0_4 : tensor<?x!qco.qubit>

    return
  }
```

:::

::::

Maybe you have already noticed
that the dialects in the MQT Compiler Collection can represent quantum
computations far beyond simple quantum circuits.
Ultimately, our goal is to define dialects expressive enough to represent a
broad range of hybrid quantum-classical computations.

### Building Programs Programmatically

Sometimes it can be useful to create an in-memory representation of a quantum
program.
For instance, a unit test might want to build a quantum program,
perform some actions, and then verify
that the resulting quantum program matches the expected outcome.

> To create quantum programs,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create quantum programs in the MLIR representation,
```
Would this addition make sense? I want to make it more explicit that we are now building the MLIR representation from above in the C++ code.

builder.ctrl(q0, [&] { builder.x(q1); });

builder.barrier({q0, q1});

auto c0 = builder.measure(q0);
auto c1 = builder.measure(q1);

builder.dealloc(q0);
builder.dealloc(q1);

auto program = builder.finalize();
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} cpp
qco::QCOProgramBuilder builder(&ctx);
builder.initialize();

auto q0 = builder.allocQubit();
auto q1 = builder.allocQubit();

q0 = builder.h(q0);
const auto [ctrlsOut, targOut] = builder.ctrl(q0, q1,
  [&](ValueRange targets) -> SmallVector<Value> {
   return {builder.x(targets[0])};
});
q0 = ctrlsOut[0];
q1 = targOut[0];

auto barrierOut = builder.barrier({q0, q1});
q0 = barrierOut[0];
q1 = barrierOut[1];

Value c0;
Value c1;
std::tie(q0, c0) = builder.measure(q0);
std::tie(q1, c1) = builder.measure(q1);

builder.sink(q0);
builder.sink(q1);

auto program = builder.finalize();
```

:::

::::

### Compilation Flow

The goal of any compiler is to take a (quantum) program
and transform it into a more efficient, executable one.
The MQT Compiler Collection achieves this using the following compilation
pipeline:

- First, a program in a front-end quantum language
  (e.g., OpenQASM) is translated to the QC dialect.

> - Next, the compiler transforms the program to the QCO dialect

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Next, the compiler converts the program to the QCO dialect
```
Strictly speaking, isn't that a conversion? Please, check because I am not certain anymore what a conversion, transformation, and translation was.

Author: No, you are absolutely right.

  and subsequently applies hardware-agnostic
  and optionally hardware-dependent passes.

>   Finally, the program is transformed back to the QC dialect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Finally, the program is converted back to the QC dialect.
```
?

- Optionally, the optimized

>   and transpiled program can be transformed into a target representation such

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  and transpiled program can be translated into a target representation such
```
?

:align: center
:width: 70%
:figclass: only-dark

The compilation pipeline of the MQT Compiler Collection.
```

This has an important consequence: Theoretically, any front-end quantum language
(today's and tomorrow's!)
that translates its abstract syntax tree to the QC dialect can leverage all
passes developed and maintained within the MQT Compiler Collection.
This approach has been a success story in the classical compiler world, where,
instead of relying on proprietary compilation stacks,
programming languages such as C++, Rust,
and Go use LLVM as an optimization driver.
The MQT Compiler Collection attempts to establish this design philosophy in the
quantum world.

## Writing Your First Optimization Pass

Optimizations are a core part of the MQT Compiler Collection,
as they are for any compiler.
In this section, you will implement a simple optimization pass
and see how it fits into the MQT Compiler Collection workflow.
So where should this pass live in the codebase?

### Directory Layout

To show where this pass belongs, let’s look at the directory layout.

---

**`mlir/include/mlir/`**

This folder contains `.h` header files and TableGen `.td` specifications.

> It consists of the following subdirectories:

Reviewer 3: THis might be a could place to spend one sentence on TableGen file, if not in the MLIR Section baove already.

| `Builder/`    | Defines the program builder.                            |
| `IR/`         | Defines the dialect, operations, and types in TableGen. |
| `Transforms/` | Defines transformations on the dialect.                 |
| `Utils/`      | Defines utilities.                                      |

**`mlir/lib/`**

The accompanying `.cpp` files for the headers.
It follows the same folder structure as the include directory.

**`mlir/tools/`**

This folder contains the entry-point function for the `mqt-cc` executable.

**`mlir/unittests/`**

This folder contains unit-tests for the MQT Compiler Collection.

---

With that in place, let’s move on to the pass implementation.

### Consecutive Hadamard Cancellation Pass

Because the Hadamard gate corresponds to a Hermitian matrix,
two consecutive Hadamards cancel each other.

```{math}
:label: hh=i
HH^{\dagger} = HH = I
```

We can use this equality to simplify a given quantum program.
Towards that end, we want to implement an optimization pass within the MQT
Compiler Collection.
By doing so, everyone using the MQT Compiler Collection
as a backend benefits from the work we put into the optimization pass.

> First, we need to define the pass in one of QCO's TableGen files.

Reviewer 3: Sounds like I can put that in an arbitrary td file.
```suggestion
First, we need to define the pass in the QCO's TableGen file responsible for transformations.
```

#include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Passes.h"

namespace mlir::qco {

#define GEN_PASS_DEF_CANCELCONSECUTIVEHADAMARDS
#include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Passes.h.inc" // -> CancelConsecutiveHadamardsBase

/**
 * @brief Cancel two consecutive Hadamard gates.
 */
struct CancelConsecutiveHadamards final
    : impl::CancelConsecutiveHadamardsBase<CancelConsecutiveHadamards> {

  // Inherit the constructor of the base class.
  using CancelConsecutiveHadamardsBase::CancelConsecutiveHadamardsBase;

protected:

  // This method is invoked for every entry point operation. Here: mlir::ModuleOp.
  void runOnOperation() override {
    mlir::ModuleOp entryPoint = getOperation();

    // TODO
  }
};
} // namespace mlir::qco
```

To implement the logic of the pass, we utilize MLIR's rewrite patterns.
Particularly, we add a class `CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern`
which inherits from `OpRewritePattern<HOp>`,
where the template variable `HOp` specifies
that the pattern should match Hadamard operations.
The overridden `matchAndRewrite` method is called
for each matched Hadamard operation.

```cpp
// file: mlir/lib/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Optimizations/CancelConsecutiveHadamards.cpp

> #include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/IR/QCOOps.h" // Newly added.

Reviewer 3: I do not get the "Newly added". What does it refer to?

Author: A snippet above uses the same file. With "Newly added" I tried to convey the idea that this include must be added to the above snippet. Because you didn't get that, I don't think I managed to do this successfully. Any ideas on how to make this more clear?

Reviewer 3: @coderabbitai Can you suggest a comprehensive solution for our problem here? I'll repeat the problem for clarity: In this tutorial document, we show different code snippets. In the first line we indicate the file where this snippet is located. We refer two times to the file mlir/lib/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Optimizations/CancelConsecutiveHadamards.cpp, the first time in lines 1200 – 1229 and the second time in lines 1239 – 1273. In the second snippet, we want to somehow indicate that we continue the first snippet, in particular, that we include an additional header file.

Reviewer 3: @MatthiasReumann What do you think about @coderabbitai's suggestions? One more idea would be to include the entire include section including the includes from the previous snippet, emphasizing the new one with the trick @coderabbitai suggested, then adding a placeholder for the struct from the previous snippet and then adding the new content. So overall, it would be something like:
````md
```{code-block} cpp
:emphasize-lines: 2

#include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Passes.h"
#include "mlir/Dialect/QCO/IR/QCOOps.h"

namespace mlir::qco {

// [previous code snippet]

struct Pattern...
```
````

Author: That's a pretty good idea!

Author: Done!

    // Replace the output of 'nextOp' with the input of 'op', essentially
    // unlinking both operations.
    //
    //           ┌───┐    ┌───┐
    // ───%in───▶│ H |───▶│ H |───%out───▶  =>  ───%out = %in───▶
    //           └───┘    └───┘
    //

    rewriter.replaceAllUsesWith(
      /*from= */nextOp.getOutputQubit(0),
      /*to= */op.getInputQubit(0));
    rewriter.eraseOp(nextOp);
    rewriter.eraseOp(op);
  }
};
```

Finally, we implement the `runOnOperation` method by initializing a pattern set
with `CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern` and calling `applyPatternsGreedily`,
which repeatedly applies the pattern until no matches remain.

```{code-block} cpp
// file: mlir/lib/Dialect/QCO/Transforms/Optimizations/CancelConsecutiveHadamards.cpp

void runOnOperation() override {
  ModuleOp entryPoint = getOperation();

  // Create the pattern set.
  RewritePatternSet patterns(&getContext());
  patterns.add<CancelConsecutiveHadamardsPattern>();

  // Apply patterns in an iterative and greedy manner.
  if (failed(applyPatternsGreedily(entryPoint, std::move(patterns)))) {
    signalPassFailure();
  }
}
```

Congratulations, you have written your first optimization pass in MLIR!
🎉

> The MQT Compiler Collection implements a generic version of this pass.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MQT Compiler Collection implements a generic version of this pass not only for the Hadamard gate but for many hermitian gates at once.
```

If you are curious about how this is achieved using C++ templates, see
[QCOUtils.h](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/blob/main/mlir/include/mlir/Dialect/QCO/QCOUtils.h).
To see the pass in action, continue with the next section.

## Using the MQT Compiler Collection Tool

> This section shows you how to use the MQT Compiler Collection tool (`mqt-cc`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, to run your optimization, this section shows you how to use the MQT Compiler Collection tool (`mqt-cc`).
```

    %c1 = arith.constant 1 : index
    %c0 = arith.constant 0 : index

    %alloc = memref.alloc() : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
    %0 = memref.load %alloc[%c0] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
    %1 = memref.load %alloc[%c1] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
    %2 = memref.load %alloc[%c2] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>

    qc.h %0 : !qc.qubit

    qc.ctrl(%0) targets (%arg0 = %1) {
      qc.x %arg0 : !qc.qubit
    } : {!qc.qubit}, {!qc.qubit}
    qc.ctrl(%1) targets (%arg0 = %2) {
      qc.x %arg0 : !qc.qubit
    } : {!qc.qubit}, {!qc.qubit}

    qc.barrier %0, %1, %2 : !qc.qubit, !qc.qubit, !qc.qubit
    %3 = qc.measure("c", 3, 0) %0 : !qc.qubit -> i1
    %4 = qc.measure("c", 3, 1) %1 : !qc.qubit -> i1
    %5 = qc.measure("c", 3, 2) %2 : !qc.qubit -> i1

    memref.dealloc %alloc : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
    return %c0_i64 : i64
  }
}
```

Note that instead of three consecutive only one hadamard is applied.
Thus, the optimizer has successfully applied the $HH^{\dagger} = HH = I$
equality.

### Emitting Quantum Intermediate Representation (QIR)

Now that your quantum program is optimized,
you may want to simulate it using a classical simulator via the MQT QIR Runtime.
To transform the program into QIR,

> you can supply the `--emit-qir` command-line option:

Reviewer 3: Is this still up-to-date? See also #1823.
(Probably my bad because you had to wait so long for the review, sorrrrrry)

Author: Good catch!

This tutorial teaches you how to understand, write, and optimize quantum IR in MLIR using the infrastructure built within the MQT. Getting started with MLIR is not an easy task. Thus, we attempt to also provide a soft introduction to the fundamental concepts of MLIR.

**Installation**

If you haven't already, make sure to visit the [installation](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core/en/latest/installation.html) page which describes how to setup the project (including MLIR) correctly.

## Understanding Quantum IR

Before we can optimize quantum IR, we first need to understand how to write it. Hence, this section describes how to create quantum programs in MLIR using the MQT.

### Dynamic And Static Allocation

The fundamental computational unit in quantum computing is the _qubit_. Consequently, at some point a quantum computation needs to allocate (and subsequently deallocate) qubits.

```mlir
/// file: dynamic-allocation.mlir
module {
    func.func @main() {
        %q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
        qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit

        func.return
    }

> }

Reviewer 4: I believe this is not a faithful representation of a QC program that would be generated from the ProgramBuilder. It definitely lacks the entrypoint definition and I am not 100% sure whether the return statement is correct.

```

An allocation and deallocation defines the start and end of a qubit's logical scope or availability within a program, respectively. The snippet above allocates a dynamic qubit. That is, a qubit without a specific hardware location. To target a specific hardware qubit, we use the `static` operation and provide the respective hardware location.

```mlir
/// file: static-allocation.mlir
module {
    func.func @main() {
        %q0 = qc.static 42 : !qc.qubit
        qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit

        func.return
    }
}
```

### Interlude: MLIR Concepts

```{note}
If you are already familiar with the fundamental concepts of MLIR, you may skip this section.
```

The short snippets above contain many fundamental concepts of MLIR.

> - **Dialects**: A dialect groups operations (`alloc`, `dealloc`) and types (`qubit`) under a common namespace (`qc`). The example above combines built-in dialects with custom dialects. The [`builtin`](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/Builtin/) dialect provides the `module` operation (the `builtin.` is usually omitted) and the [`func`](https://mlir.llvm.org/docs/Dialects/Func/) dialect contains operations to define and call functions. The custom [`qc`](./QC.md) (_"quantum circuit"_) dialect is defined in the MQT and extends the built-in ones with the necessary functionality for quantum computing.

Reviewer 4: The entire section in the docs is currently called "MLIR in the MQT", which is where I would assume this is coming from.
I would be in favor of changing that and, potentially, making this more of a "MQT Compiler Collection" section in the docs. And then explicitly refer to that name throughout the guide here.

```{math}
:label: hadamard_gate_ket0
\begin{aligned}
H|0\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle + \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle\\
H|1\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle - \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

Another important one-qubit gate is the $X$ gate, which simply flips the qubit's state.

```{math}
:label: x_gate
\begin{aligned}
X|0\rangle &= |1\rangle\\
X|1\rangle &= |0\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

Multiple qubits can be targeted as well. For example, the controlled-X gate acts on two qubits and executes an X gate on the target qubit whenever the control qubit is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

```{math}
:label: cx_gate_action
\begin{aligned}
{CX}|00\rangle &= |00\rangle \\
{CX}|01\rangle &= |01\rangle \\
{CX}|10\rangle &= |11\rangle \\
{CX}|11\rangle &= |10\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

where the first qubit is the control.

We can describe a quantum computation graphically using a quantum _circuit_.

```{image} ../_static/bell-circuit.svg
:width: 50%
:align: center

> ```

Reviewer 3: This does not render very well in dark-mode unfortunately. Probably also somewhere in this repository, but I do know for sure that we have same code snippet that loads another svg when in dark mode in the docs in the QDMI repo. Ask me if you need help with this.

<img width="354" height="152" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fed8cdfe-c0fd-4273-bab7-e0e4feadc9d5" />

# Getting Started

## Setup

> Before we actually get started, make sure to visit the [installation](../installation.md) page. There you will find detailed instructions on how to download the project as well as install and setup MLIR correctly. Once this is done, you can compile the project as follows:

Reviewer: It might make sense to already define MLIR here. Then, you no longer need to write "Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR)" further down. 🤔 

```suggestion
Before we actually get started, make sure to visit the [installation](../installation.md) page. There you will find detailed instructions on how to download the project as well as install and set up MLIR correctly. Once this is done, you can compile the project as follows:
```

```console
$ cmake -B build \
    -DMLIR_DIR=<path to MLIR> \
    -DLLVM_DIR=<path to LLVM> \
    -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE:STRING=Release \
    -DBUILD_MQT_CORE_MLIR=ON
$ cd build && cmake --build . --target mqt-cc
```

> If everything worked correctly, the following command should print an usage message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If everything worked correctly, the following command should print a usage message.
```

```{math}
:label: qubit_equation
|\psi\rangle = \alpha|0\rangle + \beta|1\rangle
```

where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are complex numbers such that $|\alpha|^2 + |\beta|^2 = 1$.

These complex numbers determine the probabilities of the outcome of a _measurement_. A measurement collapses the qubit's state
to $|0\rangle$ with probability $|\alpha|^2$ and to $|1\rangle$ with probability $|\beta|^2$ and returns the respective classical
outcome ($0$ or $1$).

Quantum gates --- mathematically described by unitary matrices --- modify a qubit's state. For instance, the Hadamard gate $H$ creates the equal superposition state for which a measurement collapses the state to $|0\rangle$ or $|1\rangle$ with probability $0.5$.

```{math}
:label: hadamard_gate_ket0
\begin{aligned}
H|0\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle + \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle\\
H|1\rangle &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|0\rangle - \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}|1\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

Another example of a one-qubit gate is the $X$ gate, which simply flips the qubit's state.

```{math}
:label: x_gate
\begin{aligned}
X|0\rangle &= |1\rangle\\
X|1\rangle &= |0\rangle
\end{aligned}
```

> A quantum gate may target multiple qubits: The controlled-X gate acts on two qubits and applies an X gate on the target qubit, if the control qubit is in the $|1\rangle$ state:

Reviewer: You are using `$X$` above. I don't really have a preference here, but I think we should decide on a "style" for gates. 🤔

1. Initialize both qubits in the $|0\rangle$ state.
2. Apply a Hadamard gate $H$ to the upper qubit. Consequently, this qubit is now in an equal superposition state.
3. Apply a controlled-X gate to both qubits. The black dot $\bullet{}$ and the $\oplus{}$ represent the control and target qubits, respectively. The resulting two-qubit state is $|\Phi^{+}\rangle$.
4. Measure both qubits and receive two classical output bits.

With that, we've already covered the most fundamental building blocks of quantum computing: qubits, measurements, gates, and finally circuits. In the next section, you will learn about the Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) framework, bringing us one step closer to our goal of understanding and building quantum compilers.

### Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR)

The Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) project is an extensive framework to build compilers for heterogeneous hardware. Key to its success is the ability to represent programs at multiple levels of abstraction, as well as the capacity to lower them from higher to lower levels.

> The core concept in MLIR is a dialect. A dialect groups operations, types, and attributes under a common namespace. A single program may combine multiple dialects, which facilitates code reuse. For example, the structured control flow (SCF) dialect provides functionality for control flow constructs, while the arith dialect defines integer and floating-point operations. Another essential dialect is the Func dialect, which lets us define and call functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core concept in MLIR is a dialect. A dialect groups operations, types, and attributes under a common namespace. A single program may combine multiple dialects, which facilitates code reuse. For example, the structured control flow (SCF) dialect provides functionality for control flow constructs, while the `arith` dialect defines integer and floating-point operations. Another essential dialect is the `func` dialect, which lets us define and call functions.
```

The following snippet combines the three dialects into a single program which sums up the numbers from 0 to 100.

```mlir
func.func @main() {
    %lb = arith.constant 0 : index
    %ub = arith.constant 100 : index
    %step = arith.constant 1 : index

    %sum_0 = arith.constant 0 : i32
    %sum = scf.for %iv = %lb to %ub step %step iter_args(%sum_iter = %sum_0) -> (i32) {
        %1 = arith.index_cast %iv : index to i32
        %2 = arith.addi %sum_iter, %1 : i32
        scf.yield %2 : i32
    }
    return
}
```

> - The `func.`, `arith.`, `scf.` specifies the dialect's name. For example, `arith.constant` represents the `constant` operation from the arith dialect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `func`, `arith`, and `scf` prefixes specify the dialect's name. For example, `arith.constant` represents the `constant` operation from the `arith` dialect.
```

The following figure illustrates the interplay of operations, blocks, and regions graphically.

```{image} ../_static/mlir-regions-blocks-ops.svg
:width: 70%
:align: center
```

The control flow dialect (`cf`) is the lower-level equivalent of the structured control flow dialect (`scf`). For each IR that uses the SCF dialect there is an equivalent one in the CF dialect. For example, the IR below is semantically equivalent to the one above that sums up the numbers from 0 to 100. However, it uses the CF instead of the SCF dialect.

```mlir
func.func @main() {
    %lb = arith.constant 0 : index
    %ub = arith.constant 100 : index
    %step = arith.constant 1 : index

    %sum_0 = arith.constant 0 : i32

    cf.br ^bb1(%lb, %sum_0 : index, i32)
  ^bb1(%iv: index, %sum_iter: i32):  // 2 preds: ^bb0, ^bb2
    %cond = arith.cmpi slt, %iv, %ub : index
    cf.cond_br %cond, ^bb2, ^bb3
  ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb1
    %1 = arith.index_cast %iv : index to i32
    %sum_next = arith.addi %sum_iter, %1 : i32
    %iv_next = arith.addi %iv, %step : index
    cf.br ^bb1(%iv_next, %sum_next : index, i32)
  ^bb3:  // pred: ^bb1
    return
  }
```

> Luckily, we don't have to perform this conversion - the transformation from one dialect to another - per hand. The MLIR framework already implements this and many other conversions between the built-in dialects. Furthermore, we can develop custom conversions using the conversion framework which defines exactly how a transformation must look like and under what circumstances the resulting IR is considered valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily, we don't have to perform this conversion --- the transformation from one dialect to another --- per hand. The MLIR framework already implements this and many other conversions between the built-in dialects. Furthermore, we can develop custom conversions using the conversion framework which defines exactly how a transformation must look like and under what circumstances the resulting IR is considered valid.
```

Conversions are a specific instance of transformation passes. More generally, a pass in MLIR traverses the IR and optionally modifies it. An example of a non-rewriting pass are analyses passes, which simply collect statistics of the IR. Moreover, multiple passes can be combined into a pass pipeline which executes a series of passes sequentially.

That's it! Now that we've also got all the fundamentals covered, we can move on and explore how the MQT Compiler Collection utilizes MLIR to build a compiler for quantum computing.

## The MQT Compiler Collection

> The MQT Compiler Collection provides tools to optimize and transpile quantum programs. This section outlines how we utilize the MLIR framework as well as its compilation infrastructure to implement these tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MQT Compiler Collection (`mqt-cc`) provides tools to optimize and transpile quantum programs. This section outlines how we utilize the MLIR framework as well as its compilation infrastructure to implement these tasks.
```

> ### Quantum Dialects

Reviewer: We should mention qubit registers at some point, now that they have become a central part of our infrastructure.

Author: Yup. This is still a big TODO. Same goes for SCF ops 👍🏻

Reviewer: Makes sense! I reviewed an in-draft PR at the end of the day. 🤠

:align: center
```

### Compilation Flow

The goal of any compiler is to take a (quantum) program and transform into a more efficient and executable one. The MQT Compiler Collection achieves this using the following compilation pipeline:

- First, a program in an input quantum language (e.g. OpenQASM) is translated to the QC dialect.
- Next, the compiler transforms the program to QCO dialect. Subsequently, we apply optimizations, optionally perform transpilation for a target quantum architecture, and finally transform the program back to the QC dialect.
- Optionally, the optimized and transpiled program can be transformed into an exit dialect such as LLVM using the Quantum Intermediate Representation (QIR) extension.

The figure below illustrates the compilation flow graphically.

```{image} ../_static/mlir/compiler-collection-pipeline.svg
:width: 70%
:align: center
```

## Writing Your First Optimization Pass

### Directory Layout

Wrapping one's head around the folder structure of MLIR projects can be quite confusing in the beginning.
To help you navigate the project, the following paragraphs provide a brief introduction to its directory layout.

#### `core/mlir/include/mlir/`

> This folder contains `.h` header files and tablegen `.td` specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This folder contains `.h` header files and TableGen `.td` specifications.
```

It consists of the following sub-directories:

| Directory    | Description                                                                  |
| ------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Compiler`   | Defines the compiler pipeline.                                               |
| `Conversion` | Defines conversions from or to other MLIR dialects.                          |

> | `Dialect`    | Defines (among others) the QC and QCO dialects. Contains the Tablegen files. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `Dialect`    | Defines (among others) the QC and QCO dialects. Contains the TablegGen files. |
```

| `Support`    | Defines utilities.                                                           |

Each of the dialects follows a consistent structure:

| Directory    | Description                                             |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| `Builder`    | Defines the program builder.                            |

> | `IR`         | Defines the dialect, operations, and types in Tablegen. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IR`         | Defines the dialect, operations, and types in TableGen. |
```

# Getting Started

The MQT Compiler Collection (`mqt-cc`) establishes a "classical-first" approach in the quantum compilation world.
Following an open-source philosophy, the project thrives on external contributions.
However, because (quantum) compilers are complex programs by nature, it can sometimes be difficult to know where and how to start.

This page guides you through the labyrinth of concepts and provides you with a solid understanding of the project's quantum compilation infrastructure and the underlying design decisions.

## Setup

Before we actually get started, make sure to visit the [installation](../installation.md) page.

> There you will find detailed instructions on how to download the project as well as install and set up the Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) framework correctly.

Reviewer 2: This is super pedantic, so feel free to ignore it, but I feel like writing out MLIR here gives it more weight and makes it scarier than it really has to be. What do you think of the alternative approach of writing something like "set up the MLIR (Multi-Level Intermediate Representation) framework correctly", or maybe even completely remove the full form? After all, this isn't really a paper that has to be 100% thorough

1. Initialize both qubits in the $|0\rangle$ state.
2. Apply a Hadamard gate H to the upper qubit. Consequently, this qubit is now in an equal superposition state.
3. Apply a controlled-X gate to both qubits. The black dot $\bullet{}$ and the $\oplus{}$ represent the control and target qubits, respectively. The resulting two-qubit state is $|\Phi^{+}\rangle$.
4. Measure both qubits and receive two classical output bits.

With that, we've already covered the most fundamental building blocks of quantum computing: qubits, measurements, gates, and finally circuits.
In the next section, you will learn about the Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) framework, bringing us one step closer to our goal of understanding and building quantum compilers.

### Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR)

The Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) project is an extensive framework to build compilers for heterogeneous hardware.
Key to its success is the ability to represent programs at multiple levels of abstraction, as well as the capacity to lower them from higher to lower levels.

> The core concept in MLIR is the dialect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The core concept in MLIR is the *dialect*.
```

Random thought: maybe we can add some more highlighting to key terms here? That makes skimming a lot easier. No strong preference for bold or italic text.

Author: I like that idea 👍🏻

A dialect groups operations, types, and attributes under a common namespace.
A single program may combine multiple dialects, which facilitates code reuse.
For example, the structured control flow (SCF) dialect provides functionality for control flow constructs, while the `arith` dialect defines integer and floating-point operations.
Another essential dialect is the `func` dialect, which lets us define and call functions.

The following snippet combines the three dialects into a single program that sums the numbers from 0 to 100.

```mlir
func.func @main() {
    %lb = arith.constant 0 : index
    %ub = arith.constant 100 : index
    %step = arith.constant 1 : index

    %sum_0 = arith.constant 0 : i32
    %sum = scf.for %iv = %lb to %ub step %step iter_args(%sum_iter = %sum_0) -> (i32) {
        %1 = arith.index_cast %iv : index to i32
        %2 = arith.addi %sum_iter, %1 : i32
        scf.yield %2 : i32
    }
    return

> }

Reviewer 2: This example feels incredibly complex for the very first code snippet of the tutorial. In particular, the reader has to first understand how one computes a sum of numbers in a stateless setting.

I'm not saying we should cut the example but I would suggest one of the following:
1) Add another example first that really just has the basics.
2) Update this example so the loop does not require `iter_args`.

```

- The `func`, `arith`, and `scf` prefixes specify the dialect's name. For example, `arith.constant` represents the `constant` operation from the `arith` dialect.

> - The percentage symbol `%` prefixes static single-assignment (SSA) values, a principle in which each variable is assigned exactly once and never reassigned. For instance, the first `arith.constant` operation produces the `%lb` SSA value.

Reviewer 2: I'm also not super convinced of only having this explanation here. I think usually, when readers check out examples, they already want to be familiar with the concepts inside it, so that they don't get hung up on some syntax while reading (which pushes them to go for a "okay the next 5 lines are that complex stuff again, let's skip them" approach).

Maybe the very basic syntax can already be explained earlier or in smaller chunks?

Reviewer 2: Also, another pedantic thing: Why do we call them "SSA values" first? I would assume many readers are not familier with SSA, but are familiar with variables in basic programming. Would it be incorrect to instead say "The `%` prefixes variables that store values just like in other programming language. However, variables in MLIR are SSA" (or something like that)?

- The `: index` and `: i32` annotations specify the types, where `i32` represents a 32-bit integer while `index` is a special type for loop bounds. The `arith.index_cast` operation casts the `%iv` value from `index` to `i32`.
- To return the final values after loop termination, we define loop-carried variables via the `iter_args` construct and the return type with the `->` symbol. Inside the loop body, we specify the value for the next iteration via the `scf.yield` operation.

> The function below returns either `%a` or `%b` depending on the condition `%cond`.

Reviewer 2: This comes a bit out of nowhere. Maybe we can add a subheading here?

```mlir
func.func @select(i32, i32, i1) -> i32 {
^entry(%a: i32, %b: i32, %cond: i1):
    cf.cond_br %cond, ^exit(%a: i32), ^exit(%b: i32)
^exit(%v : i32):
    return %v : i32

> }

Reviewer 2: This example reads really overcomplicated in my opinion. I know this is on purpose for the example, and at least for the `^exit` block that's even okay in my opinion, but at least for the `^entry` block, readers will wonder if something like this is required for every function.

```

> - The `^entry` and `^exit` labels define blocks, respectively. In MLIR, a block is a list of operations. Moreover, blocks take a list of arguments in an intuitive, function-like way.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove respectively as you don't mention two respective blocks but just the general notion of the labels defining blocks.

> - The terminator, the last operation inside the block, determines the control flow. For instance, the `cf.cond_br` terminator jumps to the exit block with variable `%a` if `%cond` is true. Otherwise, it uses variable `%b`. The `return` operation is another example of a terminator that returns control to the caller of the function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The terminator, the last operation inside the block, determines the control flow. For instance, the `cf.cond_br` terminator jumps to the exit block with `%v = %a` if `%cond` is true. Otherwise, it uses `%v = %b`. The `return` operation is another example of a terminator that returns control to the caller of the function.
```

> - A region combines multiple blocks and is indicated by curly brackets.

Reviewer 2: Why is this a bullet point? This seems to be an entirely new concept so it deserves at least its own paragraph, maybe even another subheading.

The following figure illustrates the interplay of operations, blocks, and regions graphically.

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/mlir-ir-structure.svg
:align: center
:width: 70%
:figclass: only-light
:name: fig:mlir-ir-structure

> The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't call this a data-flow graph. It doesn't have any edges, after all that connect the variable values. If anything, it would be a *control-flow* graph, and even then I would say a a control flow graph should visualise control flow with edges. So it's more accurate to call it something like "A graph illustrating the control-flow structures in the program" or so.

Author: Oh. I guess this is a copy-paste mistake from one of the other figures and I forgot to change the caption 🙈

```

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/mlir-ir-structure-dark.svg
:align: center
:width: 70%
:figclass: only-dark
:name: fig:mlir-ir-structure

The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.
```

The control-flow dialect (`cf`) is the lower-level equivalent of the structured control-flow dialect (`scf`).
For each IR that uses the SCF dialect, there is an equivalent one in the CF dialect.
For example, the IR below is semantically equivalent to the one above that sums the numbers from 0 to 100.
However, it uses the CF dialect instead of the SCF dialect.

```mlir
func.func @main() {
    %lb = arith.constant 0 : index
    %ub = arith.constant 100 : index
    %step = arith.constant 1 : index

    %sum_0 = arith.constant 0 : i32

    cf.br ^bb1(%lb, %sum_0 : index, i32)
  ^bb1(%iv: index, %sum_iter: i32):  // 2 preds: ^bb0, ^bb2
    %cond = arith.cmpi slt, %iv, %ub : index
    cf.cond_br %cond, ^bb2, ^bb3
  ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb1
    %1 = arith.index_cast %iv : index to i32
    %sum_next = arith.addi %sum_iter, %1 : i32
    %iv_next = arith.addi %iv, %step : index
    cf.br ^bb1(%iv_next, %sum_next : index, i32)
  ^bb3:  // pred: ^bb1
    return
  }
```

> Luckily, we don't have to perform this conversion --- the transformation from one dialect to another --- by hand.

Reviewer 2: I like this approach to introducing conversions. That being said, though, the reader will likely think "And why would I even want to do this conversion to begin with" after reading this sentence.

Author: I've added a sentence providing some motivation why this is useful.

The MLIR framework already implements this and many other conversions between the built-in dialects.
Furthermore, we can develop custom conversions using the conversion framework, which defines exactly how a transformation must look and under what circumstances the resulting IR is considered valid.

> Conversions are a specific instance of transformation passes. More generally, a pass in MLIR traverses the IR and optionally modifies it. An example of a non-rewriting pass is an analysis pass, which simply collects statistics about the IR. Moreover, multiple passes can be combined into a pass pipeline that executes a series of passes sequentially.

Reviewer 2: We have not introduced transformation passes yet, so this is also kind of a confusing framing.

That's it! Now that we've covered the fundamentals, we can move on and explore how the MQT Compiler Collection utilizes MLIR to build a compiler for quantum computing.

## The MQT Compiler Collection

The MQT Compiler Collection (`mqt-cc`) provides tools to optimize and transpile quantum programs.
This section outlines how we use the MLIR framework and its compilation infrastructure to implement these tasks.

### Quantum Dialects

The MQT Compiler Collection defines two dialects in MLIR, each with a distinct purpose.

> While the Quantum Circuit (QC) dialect is great for exchanging with other formats (such as OpenQASM), the Quantum Circuit Optimization (QCO) dialect is --- as the name suggests --- specifically designed for optimizations.

Reviewer 2: Pedantic again, but: What does it actually mean to be "great for exchanging with other formats". What objectively good property does it have for that? At the end of the day, we made it as close to some other formats as possible to make this conversion easier, but none of that is, in my opinion, an objectively good property that allows us to say "it is great for that", unlike the QCO dialect which is clearly great for optimization because it provides something for that (as in, the unique def-use-chain). I'd say it is "suitable", or lightly rewrite the sentence to convey the idea of it intentionally following the same structure.

Author: I've changed the wording to "is tailored to"

Let's explore their differences.

The following snippet allocates and subsequently deallocates a dynamic qubit using the `alloc` operation of the respective dialect.
In the QC dialect, we can deallocate dynamic qubits using the `dealloc` operation, whereas in the QCO dialect we mark the end of a qubit's lifespan with the `sink` operation.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_0 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

To target specific hardware qubits, we use the `static` operation.

> While static qubits in the QCO dialect still require a `sink` operation, the `dealloc` is omitted for the QC dialect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While static qubits in the QCO dialect still require a `sink` operation, the `dealloc` is not required for the QC dialect.
```

We don't actually omit the dealloc, it is just not required because no deallocation in that sense happens.

There is a sound rationale behind this seemingly obscure design choice: The QCO dialect enforces "linear typing", where each qubit SSA value is used _exactly_ once.
If there were no `sink` operation for static qubits in the QCO dialect, this property would be violated.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.static 1 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.static 1 : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_0 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

Let's apply a Hadamard gate to a qubit next:

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_1 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

> Notice how the Hadamard operation in the QCO dialect consumes and produces SSA values, while the operation in the QC dialect simply references the targeted qubit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice how the Hadamard operation in the QCO dialect consumes and produces SSA values, while the operation in the QC dialect simply passes the targeted qubit.
```

Not knowing the logic behind it, nothing of the QC example indicates that the qubit is "simply referenced".

We say that the QC dialect uses "reference semantics" whereas the QCO dialect uses "value semantics".

> Semantically, the unitary operations in the QCO dialect return the new state after modifying it.

Reviewer 2: I guess this also applies to non-unitary operations though, like the measurement?

qc.ry(%theta) %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.rx(%phi) %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%theta = arith.constant 1.570796 : f64
%phi = arith.constant 3.141593 : f64

%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q0_1 = qco.ry(%theta) %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q0_2 = qco.rx(%phi) %q0_1 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_2 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

To measure qubits, we use the `measure` operation.
In the QCO dialect, the measurement operation returns not only the classical measurement outcome but also the state after measurement.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
%c0 = qc.measure %q0 : !qc.qubit -> i1
qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q0_2, %c0 = qco.measure %q0_1 : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q0_2 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

Moving on from one-qubit gates, let us apply a controlled-X operation.
To that end, we allocate a second qubit and use the `ctrl` modifier operation of the respective dialect to implement the controlled-X.

> By using modifiers, arbitrary (multi-)controlled gates can be represented without having to explicitly define them.

Reviewer 2: This is kind of just our perspective of the designers of the dialect. I'd rewrite this slightly or just remove the "without having to explicitly define them"

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%q0 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit
%q1 = qc.alloc : !qc.qubit

qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.ctrl(%q0) {
    qc.x %q1 : !qc.qubit

} : !qc.qubit

%c0 = qc.measure %q0 : !qc.qubit -> i1
%c1 = qc.measure %q1 : !qc.qubit -> i1

qc.dealloc %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.dealloc %q1 : !qc.qubit
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%q0_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit
%q1_0 = qco.alloc : !qco.qubit

%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q0_2, %q1_1 = qco.ctrl(%q0_1) targets (%arg0 = %q1_0) {
    %q0_2 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
    qco.yield %q0_2
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%q0_3, %c0 = qco.measure %q0_2 : !qco.qubit
%q1_2, %c1 = qco.measure %q1_1 : !qco.qubit

qco.sink %q0_3 : !qco.qubit
qco.sink %q1_2 : !qco.qubit
```

:::
::::

The figure below illustrates the data-flow graph of the above textual intermediate representation graphically.

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/data-flow.svg
:align: center
:width: 75%
:figclass: only-light

> The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.

Reviewer 2: That's more like how I imagine a data-flow graph, and having this here makes it really clear that the other graph above should be renamed.

```

```{figure} ../_static/mlir/data-flow-dark.svg
:align: center
:width: 75%
:figclass: only-dark

The data-flow graph of the IR shown above.
```

The dependencies between operations are naturally expressed because the QCO dialect models quantum computations as directed acyclic "data-flow" graphs (DAGs).
For instance, the controlled-X operation depends on the application of the Hadamard operation.
This is especially useful for gate cancellation: if one gate is the inverse of another, cancel both.

> Consequently, the expressive data-flow representation is what makes the QCO dialect so powerful for optimization and algorithms more generally.

Reviewer 2: This entire paragraph is a bit confusing. I understand what it means, but I can imagine newcomers struggling with it.

E.g., what does "if one gate is the inverse of another" mean? This sentence does not clarify it's talking about consecutive vertices in the DAG.

> However, that expressiveness also increases complexity. This is best seen in the `qco.ctrl` operation:

Reviewer 2: "Compelxity" has a bit of a connotation for "runtime complexity". I'd explicitly clarify here that we are talking about a more complex syntax.

The following snippets construct the three-qubit [GHZ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greenberger–Horne–Zeilinger_state) state in the QC and QCO dialect.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%i0 = arith.constant 0 : index
%i1 = arith.constant 1 : index
%i2 = arith.constant 2 : index

%r0 = memref.alloc() : memref<3x!qc.qubit>

%q0 = memref.load %r0[%i0] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
%q1 = memref.load %r0[%i1] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
%q2 = memref.load %r0[%i2] : memref<3x!qc.qubit>

qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit
qc.h %q1 : !qc.qubit
qc.h %q2 : !qc.qubit

qc.ctrl(%q0) {
    qc.x %q1 : !qc.qubit

} : !qc.qubit

qc.ctrl(%q0) {
    qc.x %q2 : !qc.qubit

} : !qc.qubit

memref.dealloc %r0 : memref<3x!qc.qubit>
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
%i0 = arith.constant 0 : index
%i1 = arith.constant 1 : index
%i2 = arith.constant 2 : index
%N = arith.constant 3 : index

%r0_0 = qtensor.alloc(%N) : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

%r0_1, %q0_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_0[%i0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_2, %q1_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_1[%c1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

> %r0_3, %q2_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_2[%c2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
%r0_1, %q0_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_0[%i0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_2, %q1_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_1[%i1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_3, %q2_0 = qtensor.extract %r0_2[%i2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
```

Author: good catch!

%q0_1 = qco.h %q0_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q1_1 = qco.h %q1_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
%q2_1 = qco.h %q2_0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit

%q0_2, %q1_2 = qco.ctrl(%q0_1) targets (%arg0 = %q1_1) {
  %q1_2 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
  qco.yield %q1_2
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%q0_3, %q2_2 = qco.ctrl(%q0_2) targets (%arg0 = %q2_1) {
  %q2_2 = qco.x %arg0 : !qco.qubit -> !qco.qubit
  qco.yield %q2_2
} : ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit}) -> ({!qco.qubit}, {!qco.qubit})

%r0_4 = qtensor.insert %q1_2 into %r0_3[%c1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_5 = qtensor.insert %q2_2 into %r0_4[%c2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

> %r0_6 = qtensor.insert %q0_3 into %r0_5[%c0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
%r0_4 = qtensor.insert %q1_2 into %r0_3[%i1] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_5 = qtensor.insert %q2_2 into %r0_4[%i2] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
%r0_6 = qtensor.insert %q0_3 into %r0_5[%i0] : tensor<3x!qco.qubit>
```

Moreover, the QCO dialect also enforces this property for registers (`%r0_1`, `%r0_2`, etc.).
Consequently, in the QCO dialect the SSA value of a register represents its state.

What if we wanted to construct a four-qubit GHZ state?
A straightforward solution would be to simply increase the size of the register and add another controlled-X.
However, there is a more expressive and elegant solution using structured control flow (SCF) operations; in particular, a loop.
To do so, we leverage MLIR's built-in `scf` dialect.

::::{grid} 2
:::{grid-item}

```{code-block} mlir
//          QC
%N = arith.constant 4 : index

%r0 = memref.alloc() : memref<4x!qc.qubit>

%i0 = arith.constant 0 : index
%q0 = memref.load %r0[%i0] : memref<4x!qc.qubit>
qc.h %q0 : !qc.qubit

%lb = arith.constant 1 : index
%step = arith.constant 1 : index
scf.for %iv = %lb to %N step %step {
  %qi = memref.load %r0[%iv] : memref<4x!qc.qubit>
  qc.h %qi : !qc.qubit
  qc.ctrl(%q0) {
    qc.x %qi : !qc.qubit
  } : !qc.qubit
}

memref.dealloc %r0 : memref<4x!qc.qubit>
```

:::

:::{grid-item}

```mlir
//            QCO
TODO
```

:::
::::

What if we wanted to construct a generic N-qubit GHZ state?

> Naturally, a function taking N as parameter seems like an appropriate choice.

Reviewer 2: Well, actually, this is not *that* generic, because the `memref` uses a fixed size of 4 here.

builder.initialize();

const auto q0_0 = builder.allocQubit();
const auto q1_0 = builder.allocQubit();

const auto q0_1 = builder.h(q0_0);
const auto [ctrlsOut, targOut] = builder.ctrl(q0_0, q1_0,
  [&](ValueRange targets) -> SmallVector<Value> {
   return {builder.x(targets[0])};
});
const auto q0_2 = ctrlsOut[0];
const auto q1_1 = targOut[0];

const auto barrierOut = builder.barrier({q0_2, q1_1});
const auto q0_3 = barrierOut[0];
const auto q1_2 = barrierOut[1];

const auto [q0_4, c0] = builder.measure(q0_3);
const auto [q1_3, c1] = builder.measure(q1_2);

builder.sink(q0_4);
builder.sink(q1_3);

auto program = builder.finalize();
```

:::
::::

### Compilation Flow

The goal of any compiler is to take a (quantum) program and transform it into a more efficient and executable one.
The MQT Compiler Collection achieves this using the following compilation pipeline:

- First, a program in a front-end quantum language (e.g. OpenQASM) is translated to the QC dialect.
- Next, the compiler transforms the program to the QCO dialect and subsequently applies hardware-agnostic and optionally hardware-dependent passes. Finally, the program is transformed back to the QC dialect.

> - Optionally, the optimized and transpiled program can be transformed into a target dialect such as LLVM using the Quantum Intermediate Representation (QIR) extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Optionally, the optimized and transpiled program can be transformed into a target representation such as LLVM using the Quantum Intermediate Representation (QIR) extension.
```

    %c0_i64 = arith.constant 0 : i64
    %0 = qc.alloc("q", 4, 0) : !qc.qubit
    %1 = qc.alloc("q", 4, 1) : !qc.qubit
    %2 = qc.alloc("q", 4, 2) : !qc.qubit
    qc.h %0 : !qc.qubit
    qc.ctrl(%0) {
      qc.x %1 : !qc.qubit
    } : !qc.qubit
    qc.ctrl(%1) {
      qc.x %2 : !qc.qubit
    } : !qc.qubit
    %3 = qc.measure("c", 4, 0) %0 : !qc.qubit -> i1
    %4 = qc.measure("c", 4, 1) %1 : !qc.qubit -> i1
    %5 = qc.measure("c", 4, 2) %2 : !qc.qubit -> i1
    qc.dealloc %0 : !qc.qubit
    qc.dealloc %1 : !qc.qubit
    qc.dealloc %2 : !qc.qubit
    return %c0_i64 : i64
  }
}
```

Note that only three instead of four qubits are allocated.
Thus, the optimizer has successfully removed the unused qubit.

### Emitting Quantum Intermediate Representation (QIR)

Now that your quantum program is optimized, you want to simulate it using a classical simulator via the MQT QIR Runtime.
To transform the program to the QIR, you can supply the `--emit-qir` command-line option:

```console
% mqt-cc ghz.qasm --emit-qir
```

Using the `mlir-translate` tool, store the file as an LLVM file (`.ll`) as follows.

```console
% mqt-cc ghz.qasm --emit-qir | mlir-translate --mlir-to-llvmir > ghz.ll

> ```

Reviewer 2: Now that I think of it, it is kind of weird we called the option `--emit-qir` but then one still has to manually translate the output to QIR. I feel liek we should fix that in the compilation pipeline.

Reviewer 3: Should be fixed with #1823 .
